---
header-includes:
- \usepackage{setspace}
- \doublespacing
fontsize: 12pt
indent: true

# title: The Undervalued Threat of Cyber Attacks
# date: "28 November 2021"
# author: Robert Detjens

bibliography: term-paper.bib
csl: apsa.csl
---

\begin{titlepage}
  \vspace*{4cm}
  \begin{flushright}
  {\huge
    The Undervalued Threat of Cyber Attacks\\[1cm]
  }
  \large

  Robert Detjens

  28 November 2021

  \vfill
  PS 205 Fall 2021

  Michael Trevathan
  \end{flushright}

\end{titlepage}

\pagebreak

# Introduction

The modern political world is a complex, ever-changing beast. States need to keep track of a myriad of different actors
and interactions in order to stay afloat. Over the last few decades, computers have become increasingly ingrained in the
way society is run, from the everyman's pocket phone to the backbone of multi-billion-dollar companies. Governments are
no exception, and as technology has become more pivotal to states' operations, so too has the potential for devastating
cyberattacks grown.

This paper will examine this threat under the lens of realism, and explore the impact such attacks can have on
international security. According to realist theory, states want to increase their power and security in order to ensure
survival. The base state of the internet is anarchy -- there is no one central authority responsible for the whole of
the internet; all entities are responsible for maintaining their own power and security and ensuring cooperation with
others. As realism deals with states' power struggle over anarchy, this is a good fit for analysis.

The most common form of cyber attacks are direct attacks -- that is, one actor gaining unauthorized access to another's
computers. This is the most publicized and widely known form. There are numerous different threats under the cybercrime
banner; however this paper will only examine a subset of the more potentially dangerous ones. This paper will examine
the impact these crimes can have on a state, and finish with the examination of these crimes and impacts with political
realism.

\pagebreak

# Impact

Cybercrime can have an extremely large impact on the security of national systems. If attackers can gain access to a
machine, whether through phishing, vulnerabilities, or physical access, there are several options for damage.

Examining the 2020 SolarWinds breach, attackers from Russia were able to push a malicious update to a monitoring product
sold by SolarWinds. This seemingly innocuous update contained a vunlerability that allowed these attackers to infiltrate
any network that the software was installed on [@npr_solarwinds]. Affected agencies of this hack included the Dept. of
Homeland Security, the State Department, the NSA, along with several other non-governmental agencies including Microsoft
and major security research firm FireEye [@bi_solarwinds]. This attack was not directly offensive, unlike the 2017
NotPetya ransomware attack [@npr_solarwinds], but attackers were able to gain access to the affected networks and remove
sensitive data, possibly including state secrets from said government agencies. The full scope of the specifics of what
the attackers did on the compromised systems is unknown due to the nature of the attack and that the malicious software
was the main program monitoring the internal network for threats (and as such not log any malicious activity).

Looking at another recent example, another attacker was able to gain access to a FBI-operated mail server and send
emails from a verified `fbi.gov` domain [@gizmodo_fbi]. While the attacker for this incident did not do so, this could
have been leveraged to send extremely official-looking emails, matching the format used by the FBI. This incident was
resolved quickly and with no harm done, but the possibility stands of this attack having been used by a more competent
actor for a more nuanced phishing attack. Such an attack would prove very hard to detect, as official-looking emails
from an official domain would not pass all but the most scrutinous checks.

Perhaps the most widely known cyberattack in recent years was the attack on political organizations involved in the 2016
U.S. Presidential Election. Russian hackers were able to gain access to and subsequently leak confidential information
in an alleged attempt to influence the direction of the election [@election]. This series of attacks is particularly
relevant to political examination, due to the implications of soverignty both within and abroad.

One must also examine the first major deployment of offensive cyber warfare -- the famous STUXNET worm. This cyberattack
was deployed against the Iranian nuclear platform in 2010 in order to damage and destroy part of the nuclear enrichment
process [@stuxnet]. Being the first physically destructive cyber attack, this sparked much speculation on the new class
of digital warfare, and began a wave of government investment into cyber defense agencies. STUXNET was highly targeted
for the Iranian nuclear site and was very effective in its operation. This sophistication, however, needed considerable
backing to develop and would only be feasible for highly developed nations: "a weapon of the strong" [@stuxnet].

# Analysis

The base state of the Internet is anarchy -- there is no one central authority responsible for the whole of the
internet; all entities are responsible for maintaining their own power and security. There are central authorities for
standards, such as the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) for root DNS names, and the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) for publishing standards; however, these organizations only exercise control over a small
portion of the Internet's function, if any -- and none extend to conflict management as broadly as the UN and other
inter-governmental organizations do [@ir_realism]. States need to ensure that their online presence is secure and
well-defended, and potentially take advantage of lapses in the security of others.

The balance of power on the cyber field is much different than on the physical plane. Power measurement is more
difficult online than with physical goods, as the Internet is not controlled primarily by states but by companies, and
where offensive and defensive buildups by states are difficult to distinguish. Offensive vulnerabilities are by design
hidden and not made to be discoverable, and resource allocations to cyberdefence organizations have no breakdown on
which side they are being applied [@ir_realism]. The traditional security dilemma and spiral of power may occur as
strengthening defense can be falsely interpreted as offensive buildup, causing other states to also invest. Offensive
attacks also tend to be less noticeable and without as much of an impact, focusing more on information gathering rather
than a disruptive attack on physical targets -- with the main exception being STUXNET. Defensive preparation is
traditionally much harder than offense, with attackers only needing to focus on a vulnerability (or chain of) while the
target needs to make sure all of their software is secure [@ir_threats].

Additionally, the waters become more muddied with the prevalence of state-sponsored actors. In both the 2016 election
and SolarWinds attacks, the attackers are believed to have ties to the Russian intelligence agency [@npr_solarwinds],
[@election], but this cannot be proven for sure. Accordingly, the Russian government has denied having any ties to the
hackers responsible.

# Conclusion

Currently, there have been few cyber attacks causing harm in the traditional physical sense -- but as more and more
services become more and more interlinked with the Internet, the attack surface for digital espionage and destruction
also increases. Software is always developing, and with it comes the possibility of new vulnerabilities that external
actors can exploit to gain access to sensitive systems and more.

STUXNET may remain one of few attacks to impact the physical world, but as the Defence Secretary warned in 2012, attacks
on physical utilities could cause the "cyber Pearl Harbor" [@ir_realism]. Ten years on from this prediction, while we
have yet to see other states embrace the future of physical destruction foreshadowed by STUXNET, the actual danger of
these attacks still stands. Even with online-only attacks, actors wield the silent knife of infiltration, playing the
long game of stealing state secrets. While not physically impressive as with the nuclear race during the Cold War, the
endless race of attack and defence on the virtual field never stops and should not be taken lightly.

\pagebreak

# References

::: {#refs}
:::
